“THE LORD OF THE RINGS” 

THE RETURN 
OF THE KING 

J.R.R.ToIkien 

Chapter 1 . Minas Tirith 

Pippin looked out from the shelter of Gandalf s cloak. He wondered if 
he was awake or still sleeping, still in the swift -moving dream in which he 
had been wrapped so long since the great ride began. The dark world was 
rushing by and the wind sang loudly in his ears. He could see nothing but 
the wheeling stars, and away to his right vast shadows against the sky where 
the mountains of the South marched past. Sleepily he tried to reckon the 
times and stages of their journey, but his memory was drowsy and uncertain. 

There had been the first ride at terrible speed without a halt, and 
then in the dawn he had seen a pale gleam of gold, and they had come to the 
silent town and the great empty house on the hill. And hardly had they 
reached its shelter when the winged shadow had passed over once again, and 
men wilted with fear. But Gandalf had spoken soft words to him, and he had 
slept in a corner, tired but uneasy, dimly aware of comings and goings and 
of men talking and Gandalf giving orders. And then again riding, riding in 
the night. This was the second, no, the third night since he had looked in 
the Stone. And with that hideous memory he woke fully, and shivered, and the 
noise of the wind became filled with menacing voices. 

A light kindled in the sky, a blaze of yellow fire behind dark barriers 
Pippin cowered back, afraid for a moment, wondering into what dreadful 
country Gandalf was bearing him. He rubbed his eyes, and then he saw that it 
was the moon rising above the eastern shadows, now almost at the full. So 
the night was not yet old and for hours the dark journey would go on. He 
stirred and spoke. 

’Where are we, Gandalf?' he asked. 

'In the realm of Gondor,' the wizard answered. 'The land of Anurien is 
still passing by.' 

There was a silence again for a while. Then, 'What is that?' cried 
Pippin suddenly, clutching at Gandalf s cloak. 'Look! Fire, red fire! Are 
there dragons in this land? Look, there is another!' 

For answer Gandalf cried aloud to his horse. 'On, Shadowfax! We must 




hasten. Time is short. See! The beacons of Gondor are alight, calling for 
aid. War is kindled. See, there is the fire on Amon Don, and flame on 
Eilenach; and there they go speeding west: Nardol, Erelas, Min-Rimmon, 
Calenhad, and the Elalifirien on the borders of Rohan.' 

But Shadowfax paused in his stride, slowing to a walk, and then he 
lifted up his head and neighed. And out of the darkness the answering neigh 
of other horses came; and presently the thudding of hoofs was heard, and 
three riders swept up and passed like flying ghosts in the moon and vanished 
into the West. Then Shadowfax gathered himself together and sprang away, 
and 

the night flowed over him like a roaring wind. 

Pippin became drowsy again and paid little attention to Gandalf telling 
him of the customs of Gondor, and how the Lord of the City had beacons built 
on the tops of outlying hills along both borders of the great range, and 
maintained posts at these points where fresh horses were always in readiness 
to bear his errand-riders to Rohan in the North, or to B elf alas in the 
South. 'It is long since the beacons of the North were lit,' he said; 'and 
in the ancient days of Gondor they were not needed, for they had the Seven 
Stones.' Pippin stirred uneasily. 

'Sleep again, and do not be afraid!' said Gandalf. 'For you are not 
going like Frodo to Mordor, but to Minas Tirith, and there you will be as 
safe as you can be anywhere in these days. If Gondor falls, or the Ring is 
taken, then the Shire will be no refuge.' 

'You do not comfort me,' said Pippin, but nonetheless sleep crept over 
him. The last thing that he remembered before he fell into deep dream was a 
glimpse of high white peaks, glimmering like floating isles above the clouds 
as they caught the light of the westering moon. He wondered where Frodo was, 
and if he was already in Mordor, or if he was dead; and he did not know that 
Frodo from far away looked on that same moon as it set beyond Gondor ere the 
coming of the day. 

Pippin woke to the sound of voices. Another day of hiding and a night 
of journey had fleeted by. It was twilight: the cold dawn was at hand again, 
and chill grey mists were about them. Shadowfax stood steaming with sweat, 
but he held his neck proudly and showed no sign of weariness. Many tall men 
heavily cloaked stood beside him, and behind them in the mist loomed a wall 
of stone. Partly ruinous it seemed, but already before the night was passed 
the sound of hurried labour could be heard: beat of hammers, clink of 




trowels, and the creak of wheels. Torches and flares glowed dully here and 
there in the fog. Gandalf was speaking to the men that barred his way, and 
as he listened Pippin became aware that he himself was being discussed. 

'Yea truly, we know you, Mithrandir,' said the leader of the men, 'and 
you know the pass-words of the Seven Gates and are free to go forward. But 
we do not know your companion. What is he? A dwarf out of the mountains 
in 

the North? We wish for no strangers in the land at this time, unless they be 
mighty men of arms in whose faith and help we can trust.' 

'I will vouch for him before the seat of Denethor,' said Gandalf. 'And 
as for valour, that cannot be computed by stature. He has passed through 
more battles and perils than you have, Ingold, though you be twice his 
height; and he comes now from the storming of Isengard, of which we bear 
tidings, and great weariness is on him, or I would wake him. His name is 
Peregrin, a very valiant man.' 

'Man?' said Ingold dubiously; and the others laughed. 

'Man!' cried Pippin, now thoroughly roused. 'Man! Indeed not! I am a 
hobbit and no more valiant than I am a man, save perhaps now and again by 
necessity. Do not let Gandalf deceive you!' 

'Many a doer of great deeds might say no more,' said Ingold. 'But what 
is a hobbit?' 

'A Halfling,' answered Gandalf. 'Nay, not the one that was spoken of,' 
he added seeing the wonder in the men's faces. 'Not he, yet one of his 
kindred.' 

'Yes, and one who journeyed with him,' said Pippin. 'And Boromir of 
your City was with us, and he saved me in the snows of the North, and at the 
last he was slain defending me from many foes.' 

'Peace!' said Gandalf. 'The news of that grief should have been told 
first to the father.' 

'It has been guessed already,' said Ingold; 'for there have been 
strange portents here of late. But pass on now quickly! For the Lord of 
Minas Tirith will be eager to see any that bear the latest tidings of his 
son, be he man or—' 

'Hobbit,' said Pippin. 'Little service can I offer to your lord, but 
what I can do, I would do, remembering Boromir the brave.' 

'Fare you well!' said Ingold; and the men made way for Shadow fax, and 
he passed through a narrow gate in the wall. 'May you bring good counsel to 




Denethor in his need, and to us all, Mithrandir!' Ingold cried. 'But you 
come with tidings of grief and danger, as is your wont, they say.' 

’Because I come seldom but when my help is needed,’ answered Gandalf. 
’And as for counsel, to you I would say that you are over-late in repairing 
the wall of the Pelennor. Courage will now be your best defence against the 
storm that is at hand - that and such hope as I bring. For not all the 
tidings that I bring are evil. But leave your trowels and sharpen your 
swords!’ 

’The work will be finished ere evening,’ said Ingold. ’This is the last 
portion of the wall to be put in defence: the least open to attack, for it 
looks towards our friends of Rohan. Do you know aught of them? Will they 
answer the summons, think you?’ 

'Yes, they will come. But they have fought many battles at your back. 

This road and no road looks towards safety any longer. Be vigilant! But for 
Gandalf Stormcrow you would have seen a host of foes coming out of 
Anurien 

and no Riders of Rohan. And you may yet. Fare you well, and sleep not!’ 

Gandalf passed now into the wide land beyond the Rammas Echor. So the 
men of Gondor called the out wall that they had built with great labour, 
after Ithilien fell under the shadow of their Enemy. For ten leagues or more 
it ran from the mountains' feet and so back again, enclosing in its fence 
the fields of the Pelennor: fair and fertile townlands on the long slopes 
and terraces falling to the deep levels of the Anduin. At its furthest point 
from the Great Gate of the City, north-eastward, the wall was four leagues 
distant, and there from a frowning bank it overlooked the long flats beside 
the river, and men had made it high and strong; for at that point, upon a 
walled causeway, the road came in from the fords and bridges of Osgiliath 
and passed through a guarded gate between embattled towers. At its nearest 
point the wall was little more than one league from the City, and that was 
south-eastward. There Anduin, going in a wide knee about the hills of Emyn 
Arnen in South Ithilien, bent sharply west, and the out- wall rose upon its 
very brink; and beneath it lay the quays and landings of the Harlond for 
craft that came upstream from the southern fiefs. 

The townlands were rich, with wide tilth and many orchards, and 
homesteads there were with oast and garner, fold and byre, and many rills 
rippling through the green from the highlands down to Anduin. Yet the 




herdsmen and husbandmen that dwelt there were not many, and the most part 
of 

the people of Gondor lived in the seven circles of the City, or in the high 
vales of the mountain-borders, in Lossarnach, or further south in fair 
Lebennin with its five swift streams. There dwelt a hardy folk between the 
mountains and the sea. They were reckoned men of Gondor, yet their blood 
was 

mingled, and there were short and swarthy folk among them whose sires came 
more from the forgotten men who housed in the shadow of the hills in the 
Dark Years ere the coming of the kings. But beyond, in the great fief of 
B elf alas, dwelt Prince Imrahil in his castle of Dol Amroth by the sea, and 
he was of high blood, and his folk also, tall men and proud with sea-grey 
eyes. 

Now after Gandalf had ridden for some time the light of day grew in the 
sky, and Pippin roused himself and looked up. To his left lay a sea of mist, 
rising to a bleak shadow in the East; but to his right great mountains 
reared their heads, ranging from the West to a steep and sudden end, as if 
in the making of the land the River had burst through a great barrier, 
carving out a mighty valley to be a land of battle and debate in times to 
come. And there where the White Mountains of Ered Nimrais came to their 
end 

he saw, as Gandalf had promised, the dark mass of Mount Mindolluin, the deep 
purple shadows of its high glens, and its tall face whitening in the rising 
day. And upon its out-thrust knee was the Guarded City, with its seven walls 
of stone so strong and old that it seemed to have been not builded but 
carven by giants out of the bones of the earth. 

Even as Pippin gazed in wonder the walls passed from looming grey to 
white, blushing faintly in the dawn; and suddenly the sun climbed over the 
eastern shadow and sent forth a shaft that smote the face of the City. Then 
Pippin cried aloud, for the Tower of Ecthelion, standing high within the 
topmost walls' shone out against the sky, glimmering like a spike of pearl 
and silver, tall and fair and shapely, and its pinnacle glittered as if it 
were wrought of crystals; and white banners broke and fluttered from the 
battlements in the morning breeze' and high and far he heard a clear ringing 
as of silver trumpets. 

So Gandalf and Peregrin rode to the Great Gate of the Men of Gondor at 
the rising of the sun, and its iron doors rolled back before them. 




'Mithrandir! Mithrandir!’ men cried. 'Now we know that the storm is 
indeed nigh!' 

'It is upon you,' said Gandalf. 'I have ridden on its wings. Let me 
pass! I must come to your Lord Denethor, while his stewardship lasts. 
Whatever betide, you have come to the end of the Gondor that you have 
known. 

Let me pass!' 

Then men fell back before the command of his voice and questioned him 
no further, though they gazed in wonder at the hobbit that sat before him 
and at the horse that bore him. For the people of the City used horses very 
little and they were seldom seen in their streets, save only those ridden by 
the errand -riders of their lord. And they said: 'Surely that is one of the 
great steeds of the King of Rohan? Maybe the Rohirrim will come soon to 
strengthen us.' But Shadowfax walked proudly up the long winding road. 

For the fashion of Minas Tirith was such that it was built on seven 
levels, each delved into the hill, and about each was set a wall, and in 
each wall was a gate. But the gates were not set in a line: the Great Gate 
in the City Wall was at the east point of the circuit, but the next faced 
half south, and the third half north, and so to and fro upwards; so that the 
paved way that climbed towards the Citadel turned first this way and then 
that across the face of the hill. And each time that it passed the line of 
the Great Gate it went through an arched tunnel, piercing a vast pier of 
rock whose huge out-thrust bulk divided in two all the circles of the City 
save the first. For partly in the primeval shaping of the hill, partly by 
the mighty craft and labour of old, there stood up from the rear of the wide 
court behind the Gate a towering bastion of stone, its edge sharp as a 
ship-keel facing east. Up it rose, even to the level of the topmost circle, 
and there was crowned by a battlement; so that those in the Citadel might, 
like mariners in a mountainous ship, look from its peak sheer down upon the 
Gate seven hundred feet below. The entrance to the Citadel also looked 
eastward, but was delved in the heart of the rock; thence a long lamp-lit 
slope ran up to the seventh gate. Thus men reached at last the High Court, 
and the Place of the Fountain before the feet of the White Tower: tall and 
shapely, fifty fathoms from its base to the pinnacle, where the banner of 
the Stewards floated a thousand feet above the plain. 

A strong citadel it was indeed, and not to be taken by a host of 
enemies, if there were any within that could hold weapons; unless some foe 




could come behind and scale the lower skirts of Mindolluin, and so come upon 
the narrow shoulder that joined the Hill of Guard to the mountain mass. But 
that shoulder, which rose to the height of the fifth wall, was hedged with 
great ramparts right up to the precipice that overhung its western end; and 
in that space stood the houses and domed tombs of bygone kings and lords, 
for ever silent between the mountain and the tower. 

Pippin gazed in growing wonder at the great stone city, vaster and more 
splendid than anything that he had dreamed of; greater and stronger than 
Isengard, and far more beautiful. Yet it was in truth falling year by year 
into decay; and already it lacked half the men that could have dwelt at ease 
there. In every street they passed some great house or court over whose 
doors and arched gates were carved many fair letters of strange and ancient 
shapes: names Pippin guessed of great men and kindreds that had once dwelt 
there; and yet now they were silent, and no footsteps rang on their wide 
pavements, nor voice was heard in their halls, nor any face looked out from 
door or empty window. 

At last they came out of shadow to the seventh gate, and the warm sun 
that shone down beyond the river, as Frodo walked in the glades of Ithilien, 
glowed here on the smooth walls and rooted pillars, and the great arch with 
keystone carven in the likeness of a crowned and kingly head. Gandalf 
dismounted, for no horse was allowed in the Citadel, and Shadowfax suffered 
himself to be led away at the soft word of his master. 

The Guards of the gate were robed in black, and their helms were of 
strange shape, high-crowned, with long cheek-guards close-fitting to the 
face, and above the cheek-guards were set the white wings of sea-birds; but 
the helms gleamed with a flame of silver, for they were indeed wrought of 
mithril, heirlooms from the glory of old days. Upon the black surcoats were 
embroidered in white a tree blossoming like snow beneath a silver crown and 
many -pointed stars. This was the livery of the heirs of Elendil, and none 
wore it now in all Gondor, save the Guards of the Citadel before the Court 
of the Fountain where the White Tree once had grown. 

Already it seemed that word of their coming had gone before them: and 
at once they were admitted, silently, and without question. Quickly Gandalf 
strode across the white-paved court. A sweet fountain played there in the 
morning sun, and a sward of bright green lay about it; but in the midst, 
drooping over the pool, stood a dead tree, and the falling drops dripped 
sadly from its barren and broken branches back into the clear water. 




Pippin glanced at it as he hurried after Gandalf. It looked mournful, 
he thought, and he wondered why the dead tree was left in this place where 
everything else was well tended. 

Seven stars and seven stones and one white tree. 

The words that Gandalf had murmured came back into his mind. And then 
he found himself at the doors of the great hall beneath the gleaming tower; 
and behind the wizard he passed the tall silent door-wardens and entered the 
cool echoing shadows of the house of stone. 

They walked down a paved passage, long and empty, and as they went 
Gandalf spoke softly to Pippin. 'Be careful of your words, Master Peregrin! 
This is no time for hobbit pertness. Thjoden is a kindly old man. Denethor 
is of another sort, proud and subtle, a man of far greater lineage and 
power, though he is not called a king. But he will speak most to you, and 
question you much, since you can tell him of his son Boromir. He loved him 
greatly: too much perhaps; and the more so because they were unlike. But 
under cover of this love he will think it easier to learn what he witches 
from you rather than from me. Do not tell him more than you need, and leave 
quiet the matter of Frodo's errand. I will deal with that in due time. And 
say nothing about Aragorn either, unless you must.' 

'Why not? What is wrong with Strider?' Pippin whispered. 'He meant to 
come here, didn't he? And he'll be arriving soon himself anyway.' 

'Maybe, maybe,' said Gandalf. 'Though if he comes, it is likely to be 
in some way that no one expects, not even Denethor. It will be better so. At 
least he should come unheralded by us.' 

Gandalf halted before a tall door of polished metal. 'See, Master 
Pippin, there is no time to instruct you now in the history of Gondor; 
though it might have been better, if you had learned something of it, when 
you were still birds-nesting and playing truant in the woods of the Shire. 

Do as I bid! It is scarcely wise when bringing the news of the death of his 
heir to a mighty lord to speak over much of the coming of one who will, if 
he comes, claim the kingship. Is that enough?' 

'Kingship?' said Pippin amazed. 

'Yes,' said Gandalf. 'If you have walked all these days with closed 
ears and mind asleep, wake up now!' He knocked on the door. 

The door opened, but no one could be seen to open it. Pippin looked 
into a great hall. It was lit by deep windows in the wide aisles at either 
side, beyond the rows of tall pillars that upheld the roof. Monoliths of 




black marble, they rose to great capitals carved in many strange figures of 
beasts and leaves; and far above in shadow the wide vaulting gleamed with 
dull gold, inset with flowing traceries of many colours. No hangings nor 
storied webs, nor any things of woven stuff or of wood, were to be seen in 
that long solemn hall; but between the pillars there stood a silent company 
of tall images graven in cold stone. 

Suddenly Pippin was reminded of the hewn rocks of Argonath, and awe 
fell on him, as he looked down that avenue of kings long dead. At the far 
end upon a dais of many steps was set a high throne under a canopy of marble 
shaped like a crowned helm; behind it was carved upon the wall and set with 
gems an image of a tree in flower. But the throne was empty. At the foot of 
the dais, upon the lowest step which was broad and deep, there was a stone 
chair, black and unadorned, and on it sat an old man gazing at his lap. In 
his hand was a white rod with a golden knob. He did not look up. Solemnly 
they paced the long floor towards him, until they stood three paces from his 
footstool. Then Gandalf spoke. 

'Hail, Lord and Steward of Minas Tirith, Denethor son of Ecthelion! I 
am come with counsel and tidings in this dark hour.' 

Then the old man looked up. Pippin saw his carven face with its proud 
bones and skin like ivory, and the long curved nose between the dark deep 
eyes; and he was reminded not so much of Boromir as of Aragorn. 'Dark 
indeed 

is the hour,' said the old man, 'and at such times you are wont to come, 
Mithrandir. But though all the signs forebode that the doom of Gondor is 
drawing nigh, less now to me is that darkness than my own darkness. It has 
been told to me that you bring with you one who saw my son die. Is this he?' 

'It is,' said Gandalf. 'One of the twain. The other is with Thjoden of 
Rohan and may come hereafter. Halflings they are, as you see, yet this is 
not he of whom the omens spoke.' 

'Yet a Halfling still,' said Denethor grimly, 'and little love do I 
bear the name, since those accursed words came to trouble our counsels and 
drew away my son on the wild errand to his death. My Boromir! Now we 
have 

need of you. Faramir should have gone in his stead.' 

'He would have gone,' said Gandalf. 'Be not unjust in your grief! 
Boromir claimed the errand and would not suffer any other to have it. He was 
a masterful man, and one to take what he desired. I journeyed far with him 




and learned much of his mood. But you speak of his death. You have had news 
of that ere we came?' 

'I have received this,' said Denethor, and laying down his rod he 
lifted from his lap the thing that he had been gazing at. In each hand he 
held up one half of a great horn cloven through the middle: a wild-ox horn 
bound with silver. 

That is the horn that Boromir always wore!' cried Pippin. 

'Verily,' said Denethor. 'And in my turn I bore it, and so did each 
eldest son of our house, far back into the vanished years before the failing 
of the kings, since Vorondil father of Mardil hunted the wild kine of Araw 
in the far fields of Rhyn. I heard it blowing dim upon the northern marches 
thirteen days ago, and the River brought it to me, broken: it will wind no 
more.' He paused and there was a heavy silence. Suddenly he turned his black 
glance upon Pippin. 'What say you to that, Halfling?' 

'Thirteen, thirteen days,' faltered Pippin. 'Yes, I think that would be 
so. Yes, I stood beside him, as he blew the horn. But no help came. Only 
more ores.' 

'So,' said Denethor, looking keenly at Pippin's face. 'You were there? 

Tell me more! Why did no help come? And how did you escape, and yet he 
did 

not, so mighty a man as he was, and only ores to withstand him?' 

Pippin flushed and forgot his fear. 'The mightiest man may be slain by 
one arrow,' he said; 'and Boromir was pierced by many. When last I saw him 
he sank beside a tree and plucked a black -feathered shaft from his side. 

Then I swooned and was made captive. I saw him no more, and know no 
more. 

But I honour his memory, for he was very valiant. He died to save us, my 
kinsman Meriadoc and myself, waylaid in the woods by the soldiery of the 
Dark Lord; and though he fell and failed, my gratitude is none the less.' 

Then Pippin looked the old man in the eye, for pride stirred strangely 
within him, still stung by the scorn and suspicion in that cold voice. 

'Little service, no doubt, will so great a lord of Men think to find in a 
hobbit, a halfling from the northern Shire; yet such as it is, I will offer 
it, in payment of my debt.' Twitching aside his grey cloak, Pippin drew 
forth his small sword and laid it at Denethor's feet. 

A pale smile, like a gleam of cold sun on a winter's evening, passed 
over the old man's face; but he bent his head and held out his hand, laying 




the shards of the horn aside. ’Give me the weapon!' he said. 

Pippin lifted it and presented the hilt to him. 'Whence came this?' 
said Denethor. 'Many, many years lie on it. Surely this is a blade wrought 
by our own kindred in the North in the deep past?' 

'It came out of the mounds that lie on the borders of my country ' said 
Pippin. 'But only evil wights dwell there now, and I will not willingly tell 
more of them.' 

'I see that strange tales are woven about you,' said Denethor, 'and 
once again it is shown that looks may belie the man - or the halfling. I 
accept your service. For you are not daunted by words; and you have 
courteous speech, strange though the sound of it may be to us in the South. 
And we shall have need of all folk of courtesy, be they great or small, in 
the days to come. Swear to me now!' 

'Take the hilt,' said Gandalf, 'and speak after the Lord, if you are 
resolved on this.' 

'I am,' said Pippin. 

The old man laid the sword along his lap, and Pippin put his hand to 
the hilt, and said slowly after Denethor: 

'Here do I swear fealty and service to Gondor, and to the Lord and 
Steward of the realm, to speak and to be silent, to do and to let be, to 
come and to go, in need or plenty, in peace or war, in living or dying, from 
this hour henceforth, until my lord release me, or death take me, or the 
world end. So say I, Peregrin son of Paladin of the Shire of the Halflings.' 

And this do I hear, Denethor son of Ecthelion, Lord of Gondor, Steward 
of the High King, and I will not forget it, nor fail to reward that which is 
given: fealty with love, valour with honour, oath- breaking with vengeance.' 
Then Pippin received back his sword and put it in its sheath. 

'And now,' said Denethor, 'my first command to you: speak and be not 
silent! Tell me your full tale, and see that you recall all that you can of 
Boromir, my son. Sit now and begin!' As he spoke he struck a small silver 
gong that stood near his footstool, and at once servants came forward. 
Pippin saw then that they had been standing in alcoves on either side of the 
door, unseen as he and Gandalf entered. 

'Bring wine and food and seats for the guests,' said Denethor, 'and see 
that none trouble us for one hour.' 

'It is all that I have to spare, for there is much else to heed,' he 
said to Gandalf. 'Much of more import, it may seem, and yet to me less 




pressing. But maybe we can speak again at the end of the day.’ 

'And earlier, it is to be hoped,' said Gandalf. 'For I have not ridden 
hither from Isengard, one hundred and fifty leagues, with the speed of wind, 
only to bring you one small warrior, however courteous. Is it naught to you 
that Thjoden has fought a great battle and that Isengard is overthrown, and 
that I have broken the staff of Saruman?' 

'It is much to me. But I know already sufficient of these deeds for my 
own counsel against the menace of the East.' He turned his dark eyes on 
Gandalf, and now Pippin saw a likeness between the two, and he felt the 
strain between them, almost as if he saw a line of smouldering fire, drawn 
from eye to eye, that might suddenly burst into flame. 

Denethor looked indeed much more like a great wizard than Gandalf did, 
more kingly, beautiful, and powerful; and older. Yet by a sense other than 
sight Pippin perceived that Gandalf had the greater power and the deeper 
wisdom, and a majesty that was veiled. And he was older, far older. 'How 
much older?' he wondered, and then he thought how odd it was that he had 
never thought about it before. Treebeard had said something about wizards, 
but even then he had not thought of Gandalf as one of them. What was 
Gandalf? In what far time and place did he come into the world, and when 
would he leave it? And then his musings broke off, and he saw that Denethor 
and Gandalf still looked each other in the eye, as if reading the other's 
mind. But it was Denethor who first withdrew his gaze. 

'Yea,' he said; 'for though the Stones be lost, they say, still the 
lords of Gondor have keener sight than lesser men, and many messages come 
to 

them. But sit now!' 

Then men came bearing a chair and a low stool, and one brought a salver 
with a silver flagon and cups, and white cakes. Pippin sat down, but he 
could not take his eyes from the old lord. Was it so, or had he only 
imagined it, that as he spoke of the Stones a sudden gleam of his eye had 
glanced upon Pippin's face? 

'Now tell me your tale, my liege,' said Denethor, half kindly; half 
mockingly. 'For the words of one whom my son so befriended will be 
welcome 
indeed.' 

Pippin never forgot that hour in the great hall under the piercing eye 
of the Lord of Gondor, stabbed ever and anon by his shrewd questions, and 




all the while conscious of Gandalf at his side, watching and listening, and 
(so Pippin felt) holding in check a rising wrath and impatience. When the 
hour was over and Denethor again rang the gong, Pippin felt worn out. 'It 
cannot be more than nine o'clock,' he thought. 'I could now eat three 
breakfasts on end.' 

'Lead the Lord Mithrandir to the housing prepared for him,' said 
Denethor, 'and his companion may lodge with him for the present, if he will. 
But be it known that I have now sworn him to my service, and he shall be 
known as Peregrin son of Paladin and taught the lesser pass-words. Send word 
to the Captains that they shall wait on me here, as soon as may be after the 
third hour has rung. 

'And you, my Lord Mithrandir, shall come too, as and when you will. 
None shall hinder your coming to me at any time, save only in my brief hours 
of sleep. Let your wrath at an old man's folly run off and then return to my 
comfort!' 

'Folly?' said Gandalf. 'Nay, my lord, when you are a dotard you will 
die. You can use even your grief as a cloak. Do you think that I do not 
understand your purpose in questioning for an hour one who knows the least, 
while I sit by?' 

'If you understand it, then be content,' returned Denethor. 'Pride 
would be folly that disdained help and counsel at need; but you deal out 
such gifts according to your own designs. Yet the Lord of Gondor is not to 
be made the tool of other men's purposes, however worthy. And to him there 
is no purpose higher in the world as it now stands than the good of Gondor; 
and the rule of Gondor, my lord, is mine and no other man's, unless the king 
should come again.' 

'Unless the king should come again?' said Gandalf. 'Well, my lord 
Steward, it is your task to keep some kingdom still against that event, 
which few now look to see. In that task you shall have all the aid that you 
are pleased to ask for. But I will say this: the rule of no realm is mine, 
neither of Gondor nor any other, great or small. But all worthy things that 
are in peril as the world now stands, those are my care. And for my part, I 
shall not wholly fail of my task, though Gondor should perish, if anything 
passes through this night that can still grow fair or bear fruit and flower 
again in days to come. For I also am a steward. Did you not know?' And with 
that he turned and strode from the hall with Pippin running at his side. 

Gandalf did not look at Pippin or speak a word to him as they went. 




Their guide brought them from the doors of the hall, and then led them 
across the Court of the Fountain into a lane between tall buildings of 
stone. After several turns they came to a house close to the wall of the 
citadel upon the north side, not far from the shoulder that linked the hill 
with the mountain. Within, upon the first floor above the street, up a wide 
carven stair, he showed them to a fair room, light and airy, with goodly 
hangings of dull gold sheen unfigured. It was sparely furnished, having but 
a small table, two chairs and a bench; but at either side there were 
curtained alcoves and well -clad beds within with vessels and basins for 
washing. There were three high narrow windows that looked northward over 
the 

great curve of Anduin, still shrouded in mists, towards the Emyn Muil and 
Rauros far away. Pippin had to climb on the bench to look out over the deep 
stone sill. 

Are you angry with me, Gandalf?' he said, as their guide went out and 
closed the door. 'I did the best I could.’ 

'You did indeed!' said Gandalf, laughing suddenly; and he came and 
stood beside Pippin, putting his arm about the hobbit's shoulders and gazing 
out of the window. Pippin glanced in some wonder at the face now close 
beside his own, for the sound of that laugh had been gay and merry. Yet in 
the wizard's face he saw at first only lines of care and sorrow; though as 
he looked more intently he perceived that under all there was a great joy: a 
fountain of mirth enough to set a kingdom laughing, were it to gush forth. 

'Indeed you did your best,' said the wizard; 'and I hope that it may be 
long before you find yourself in such a tight corner again between two such 
terrible old men. Still the Lord of Gondor learned more from you than you 
may have guessed, Pippin. You could not hide the fact that Boromir did not 
lead the Company from Moria, and that there was one among you of high 
honour 

who was coming to Minas Tirith; and that he had a famous sword. Men think 
much about the stories of old days in Gondor; and Denethor has given long 
thought to the rhyme and to the words Isildur's Bane, since Boromir went 
away. 

'He is not as other men of this time, Pippin, and whatever be his 
descent from father to son, by some chance the blood of Westernesse runs 
nearly true in him; as it does in his other son, Faramir, and yet did not in 
Boromir whom he loved best. He has long sight. He can perceive, if he bends 




his will thither, much of what is passing in the minds of men, even of those 
that dwell far off. It is difficult to deceive him, and dangerous to try. 

'Remember that! For you are now sworn to his service. I do not know 
what put it into your head, or your heart, to do that. But it was well done. 

I did not hinder it, for generous deed should not be checked by cold 
counsel. It touched his heart, as well (may I say it) as pleasing his 
humour. And at least you are free now to move about as you will in Minas 
Tirith - when you are not on duty. For there is another side to it. You are 
at his command; and he will not forget. Be wary still!' 

He fell silent and sighed. 'Well, no need to brood on what tomorrow may 
bring. For one thing, tomorrow will be certain to bring worse than today, 
for many days to come. And there is nothing more that I can do to help it. 

The board is set, and the pieces are moving. One piece that I greatly desire 
to find is Faramir, now the heir of Denethor. I do not think that he is in 
the City; but I have had no time to gather news. I must go. Pippin. I must 
go to this lords' council and learn what I can. But the Enemy has the move, 
and he is about to open his full game. And pawns are likely to see as much 
of it as any, Peregrin son of Paladin, soldier of Gondor. Sharpen your 
blade!' 

Gandalf went to the door, and there he turned. 'I am in haste Pippin,' 
he said. 'Do me a favour when you go out. Even before you rest, if you are 
not too weary. Go and find Shadowfax and see how he is housed. These 
people 

are kindly to beasts, for they are a good and wise folk, but they have less 
skill with horses than some.' 

With that Gandalf went out; and as he did so, there came the note of a 
clear sweet bell ringing in a tower of the citadel. Three strokes it rang, 
like silver in the air, and ceased: the third hour from the rising of the 
sun. 

After a minute Pippin went to the door and down the stair and looked 
about the street. The sun was now shining warm and bright, and the towers 
and tall houses cast long clear-cut shadows westward. High in the blue air 
Mount Mindolluin lifted its white helm and snowy cloak. Armed men went to 
and fro in the ways of the City, as if going at the striking of the hour to 
changes of post and duty. 

'Nine o'clock we'd call it in the Shire,' said Pippin aloud to himself. 

'Just the time for a nice breakfast by the open window in spring sunshine. 




And how I should like breakfast! Do these people ever have it, or is it 
over? And when do they have dinner, and where?' 

Presently he noticed a man, clad in black and white, coming along the 
narrow street from the centre of the citadel towards him. Pippin felt lonely 
and made up his mind to speak as the man passed; but he had no need. The man 
came straight up to him. 

'You are Peregrin the Halfling?' he said. 'I am told that you have been 
sworn to the service of the Lord and of the City. Welcome! He held out his 
hand and Pippin took it. 

'I am named Beregond son of Baranor. I have no duty this morning, and I 
have been sent to you to teach you the pass-words, and to tell you some of 
the many things that no doubt you will wish to know. And for my part, I 
would learn of you also. For never before have we seen a halfling in this 
land and though we have heard rumour of them, little is said of them in any 
tale that we know. Moreover you are a friend of Mithrandir. Do you know him 
well?' 

'Well,' said Pippin. 'I have known of him all my short life, as you 
might say; and lately I have travelled far with him. But there is much to 
read in that book, and I cannot claim to have seen more than a page or two. 

Yet perhaps I know him as well as any but a few. Aragorn was the only one of 
our Company, I think, who really knew him.' 

'Aragorn?' said Beregond. 'Who is he?' 

'Oh,' stammered Pippin, 'he was a man who went about with us. I think 
he is in Rohan now.' 

'You have been in Rohan, I hear. There is much that I would ask you of 
that land also; for we put much of what little hope we have in its people. 

But I am forgetting my errand, which was first to answer what you would ask. 
What would you know, Master Peregrin?' 

'Er well,' said Pippin, 'if I may venture to say so, rather a burning 
question in my mind at present is, well, what about breakfast and all that? 

I mean, what are the meal-times, if you understand me, and where is the 
dining-room, if there is one? And the inns? I looked, but never a one could 
I see as we rode up, though I had been borne up by the hope of a draught of 
ale as soon as we came to the homes of wise and courtly men.' 

Beregond looked at him gravely. 'An old campaigner, I see,' he said. 

'They say that men who go warring afield look ever to the next hope of food 
and of drink; though I am not a travelled man myself. Then you have not yet 




eaten today?' 

'Well, yes, to speak in courtesy, yes,' said Pippin. 'But no more than 
a cup of wine and a white cake or two by the kindness of your lord; but he 
racked me for it with an hour of questions, and that is hungry work.' 

Beregond laughed. 'At the table small men may do the greater deeds, we 
say. But you have broken your fast as well as any man in the Citadel, and 
with greater honour. This is a fortress and a tower of guard and is now in 
posture of war. We rise ere the Sun, and take a morsel in the grey light, 
and go to our duties at the opening hour. But do not despair!' He laughed 
again, seeing the dismay in Pippin's face. 'Those who have had heavy duty 
take somewhat to refresh their strength in the mid-morning. Then there is 
the nuncheon, at noon or after as duties allow; and men gather for the 
daymeal, and such mirth as there still may be, about the hour of sunset. 

'Come! We will walk a little and then go find us some refreshment, and 
eat and drink on the battlement, and survey the fair morning.' 

'One moment!' said Pippin blushing. 'Greed, or hunger by your courtesy, 
put it out of my mind. But Gandalf, Mithrandir as you call him, asked me to 
see to his horse - Shadowfax, a great steed of Rohan, and the apple of the 
king's eye, I am told, though he has given him to Mithrandir for his 
services. I think his new master loves the beast better than he loves many 
men, and if his good will is of any value to this city, you will treat 
Shadowfax with all honour: with greater kindness than you have treated this 
hobbit, if it is possible.' 

'Hobbit?' said Beregond. 

'That is what we call ourselves,' said Pippin. 

'I am glad to learn it,' said Beregond, 'for now I may say that strange 
accents do not mar fair speech, and hobbits are a fair-spoken folk. But 
come! You shall make me acquainted with this good horse. I love beasts, and 
we see them seldom in this stony city; for my people came from the 
mountain-vales, and before that from Ithilien. But fear not! The visit shall 
be short, a mere call of courtesy, and we will go thence to the butteries.' 

Pippin found that Shadowfax had been well housed and tended. For in the 
sixth circle, outside the walls of the citadel, there were some fair stables 
where a few swift horses were kept, hard by the lodgings of the 
errand-riders of the Lord: messengers always ready to go at the urgent 
command of Denethor or his chief captains. But now all the horses and the 
riders were out and away. 




Shadowfax whinnied as Pippin entered the stable and turned his head. 
’Good morning!' said Pippin. ’Gandalf will come as soon as he may. He is 
busy, but he sends greetings, and I am to see that all is well with you; and 
you resting, I hope, after your long labours.' 

Shadowfax tossed his head and stamped. But he allowed Beregond to 
handle his head gently and stroke his great flanks. 

'He looks as if he were spoiling for a race, and not newly come from a 
great journey,' said Beregond. 'How strong and proud he is! Where is his 
harness? It should be rich and fair.' 

'None is rich and fair enough for him,' said Pippin. 'He will have 
none. If he will consent to bear you, bear you he does; and if not, well, no 
bit, bridle, whip, or thong will tame him. Farewell, Shadowfax! Have 
patience. Battle is coming.' 

Shadowfax lifted up his head and neighed, so that the stable shook, and 
they covered their ears. Then they took their leave, seeing that the manger 
was well filled. 

'And now for our manger,' said Beregond, and he led Pippin back to the 
citadel, and so to a door in the north side of the great tower. There they 
went down a long cool stair into a wide alley lit with lamps. There were 
hatches in the walls at the side, and one of these was open. 

'This is the storehouse and buttery of my company of the Guard.' said 
Beregond. 'Greetings, Targon!' he called through the hatch. 'It is early 
yet, but here is a newcomer that the Lord has taken into his service. He has 
ridden long and far with a tight belt, and has had sore labour this morning, 
and he is hungry. Give us what you have!' 

They got there bread, and butter, and cheese and apples: the last of 
the winter store, wrinkled but sound and sweet; and a leather flagon of 
new-drawn ale, and wooden platters and cups. They put all into a wicker 
basket and climbed back into the sun; and Beregond brought Pippin to a place 
at the east end of the great out-thrust battlement where there was an 
embrasure in the walls with a stone seat beneath the sill. From there they 
could look out on the morning over the world. 

They ate and drank; and they talked now of Gondor and its ways and 
customs, now of the Shire and the strange countries that Pippin had seen. 

And ever as they talked Beregond was more amazed, and looked with greater 
wonder at the hobbit, swinging his short legs as he sat on the seat, or 
standing tiptoe upon it to peer over the sill at the lands below. 




'I will not hide from you, Master Peregrin,' said Beregond, 'that to us 
you look almost as one of our children, a lad of nine summers or so; and yet 
you have endured perils and seen marvels that few of our greybeards could 
boast of. I thought it was the whim of our Lord to take him a noble page, 
after the manner of the kings of old, they say. But I see that it is not so, 
and you must pardon my foolishness.' 

'I do,' said Pippin. 'Though you are not far wrong. I am still little 
more than a boy in the reckoning of my own people, and it will be four years 
yet before I "come of age", as we say in the Shire: But do not bother about 
me. Come and look and tell me what I can see.' 

The sun was now climbing, and the mists in the vale below had been 
drawn up. The last of them were floating away, just overhead, as wisps of 
white cloud borne on the stiffening breeze from the East, that was now 
flapping and tugging the flags and white standards of the citadel. Away down 
in the valley-bottom, five leagues or so as the eye leaps, the Great River 
could now be seen grey and glittering, coming out of the north-west, and 
bending in a mighty sweep south and west again, till it was lost to view in 
a haze and shimmer, far beyond which lay the Sea fifty leagues away. 

Pippin could see all the Pelennor laid out before him, dotted into the 
distance with farmsteads and little walls, barns and byres, but nowhere 
could he see any kine or other beasts. Many roads and tracks crossed the 
green fields, and there was much coming and going: wains moving in lines 
towards the Great Gate, and others passing out. Now and again a horseman 
would ride up, and leap from the saddle and hasten into the City. But most 
of the traffic went out along the chief highway, and that turned south, and 
then bending swifter than the River skirted the hills and passed soon from 
sight. It was wide and well -paved, and along its eastern edge ran a broad 
green riding -track, and beyond that a wall. On the ride horsemen galloped to 
and fro, but all the street seemed to be choked with great covered wains 
going south. But soon Pippin saw that all was in fact well-ordered: the 
wains were moving in three lines, one swifter drawn by horses; another 
slower, great waggons with fair housings of many colours, drawn by oxen; and 
along the west rim of the road many smaller carts hauled by trudging men. 

'That is the road to the vales of Tumladen and Lossarnach, and the 
mountain-villages, and then on to Lebennin,' said Beregond. 'There go the 
last of the wains that bear away to refuge the aged the children, and the 
women that must go with them. They must all be gone from the Gate and the 




road clear for a league before noon: that was the order. It is a sad 
necessity.' He sighed. ’Few, maybe, of those now sundered will meet again. 
And there were always too few children in this city; but now there are 
none-save some young lads that will not depart, and may find some task to 
do: my own son is one of them.' 

They fell silent for a while. Pippin gazed anxiously eastward, as if at 
any moment he might see thousands of ores pouring over the fields. 'What can 
I see there?' he asked, pointing down to the middle of the great curve of 
the Anduin. 'Is that another city, or what is it?' 

'It was a city,' said Beregond, 'the chief city of Gondor, of which 
this was only a fortress. For that is the ruin of Osgiliath on either side 
of Anduin, which our enemies took and burned long ago. Yet we won it back in 
the days of the youth of Denethor: not to dwell in, but to hold as an 
outpost, and to rebuild the bridge for the passage of our arms. And then 
came the Fell Riders out of Minas Morgul.' 

'The Black Riders?' said Pippin, opening his eyes, and they were wide 
and dark with an old fear re-awakened. 

'Yes, they were black,' said Beregond, 'and I see that you know 
something of them, though you have not spoken of them in any of your tales.' 

'I know of them,' said Pippin softly, 'but I will not speak of them 
now, so near, so near.' He broke off and lifted his eyes above the River, 
and it seemed to him that all he could see was a vast and threatening 
shadow. Perhaps it was mountains looming on the verge of sight, their jagged 
edges softened by wellnigh twenty leagues of misty air; perhaps it was but a 
cloud-wall, and beyond that again a yet deeper gloom. But even as he looked 
it seemed to his eyes that the gloom was growing and gathering, very slowly, 
slowly rising to smother the regions of the sun. 

'So near to Mordor?' said Beregond quietly. 'Yes, there it lies. We 
seldom name it; but we have dwelt ever in sight of that shadow: sometimes it 
seems fainter and more distant; sometimes nearer and darker. It is growing 
and darkening now; and therefore our fear and disquiet grow too. And the 
Fell Riders, less than a year ago they won back the crossings, and many of 
our best men were slain. Boromir it was that drove the enemy at last back 
from this western shore, and we hold still the near half of Osgiliath. For a 
little while. But we await now a new onslaught there. Maybe the chief 
onslaught of the war that comes.' 

'When?' said Pippin. 'Have you a guess? For I saw the beacons last 




night and the errand-riders; and Gandalf said that it was a sign that war 
had begun. He seemed in a desperate hurry. But now everything seems to have 
slowed up again.' 

'Only because everything is now ready,' said Beregond. 'It is but the 
deep breath before the plunge.' 

'But why were the beacons lit last night?' 

'It is over -late to send for aid when you are already besieged,' 
answered Beregond. 'But I do not know the counsel of the Lord and his 
captains. They have many ways of gathering news. And the Lord Denethor is 
unlike other men: he sees far. Some say that as he sits alone in his high 
chamber in the Tower at night, and bends his thought this way and that, he 
can read somewhat of the future; and that he will at times search even the 
mind of the Enemy, wrestling with him. And so it is that he is old, worn 
before his time. But however that may be, my lord Faramir is abroad, beyond 
the River on some perilous errand, and he may have sent tidings. 

'But if you would know what I think set the beacons ablaze, it was the 
news that came yestereve out of Lebennin. There is a great fleet drawing 
near to the mouths of Anduin, manned by the corsairs of Umbar in the South. 
They have long ceased to fear the might of Gondor, and they have allied them 
with the Enemy, and now make a heavy stroke in his cause. For this attack 
will draw off much of the help that we looked to have from Lebennin and 
Belfalas, where folk are hardy and numerous. All the more do our thoughts go 
north to Rohan; and the more glad are we for these tidings of victory that 
you bring. 

'And yet' - he paused and stood up, and looked round, north, east, and 
south - 'the doings at Isengard should warn us that we are caught now in a 
great net and strategy. This is no longer a bickering at the fords, raiding 
from Ithilien and from Anurien, ambushing and pillaging. This is a great war 
long -planned, and we are but one piece in it, whatever pride may say. Things 
move in the far East beyond the Inland Sea, it is reported; and north in 
Mirkwood and beyond; and south in Harad. And now all realms shall be put to 
the test, to stand, or fall - under the Shadow. 

'Yet, Master Peregrin, we have this honour: ever we bear the brunt of 
the chief hatred of the Dark Lord, for that hatred comes down out of the 
depths of time and over the deeps of the Sea. Here will the hammer-stroke 
fall hardest. And for that reason Mithrandir came hither in such haste. For 
if we fall, who shall stand? And, Master Peregrin, do you see any hope that 




we shall stand?' 

Pippin did not answer. He looked at the great walls, and the towers and 
brave banners, and the sun in the high sky, and then at the gathering gloom 
in the East; and he thought of the long fingers of that Shadow: of the ores 
in the woods and the mountains, the treason of Isengard, the birds of evil 
eye, and the Black Riders even in the lanes of the Shire - and of the winged 
terror, the Nazgyl. He shuddered, and hope seemed to wither. And even at 
that moment the sun for a second faltered and was obscured, as though a dark 
wing had passed across it. Almost beyond hearing he thought he caught, high 
and far up in the heavens, a cry: faint, but heart-quelling, cruel and cold. 

He blanched and cowered against the wall. 

’What was that?' asked Beregond. 'You also felt something?' 

'Yes,' muttered Pippin. 'It is the sign of our fall, and the shadow of 
doom, a Fell Rider of the air.' 

'Yes, the shadow of doom,' said Beregond. 'I fear that Minas Tirith 
shall fall. Night comes. The very warmth of my blood seems stolen away.' 

For a time they sat together with bowed heads and did not speak. Then 
suddenly Pippin looked up and saw that the sun was still shining and the 
banners still streaming in the breeze. He shook himself. 'It is passed,' he 
said. 'No, my heart will not yet despair. Gandalf fell and has returned and 
is with us. We may stand, if only on one leg, or at least be left still upon 
our knees.' 

'Rightly said!' cried Beregond, rising and striding to and fro. 'Nay, 
though all things must come utterly to an end in time, Gondor shall not 
perish yet. Not though the walls be taken by a reckless foe that will build 
a hill of carrion before them. There are still other fastnesses, and secret 
ways of escape into the mountains. Hope and memory shall live still in some 
hidden valley where the grass is green.' 

'All the same, I wish it was over for good or ill.' said Pippin. 'I am 
no warrior at all and dislike any thought of battle; but waiting on the edge 
of one that I can't escape is worst of all. What a long day it seems 
already ! I should be happier, if we were not obliged to stand and watch, 
making no move, striking nowhere first. No stroke would have been struck in 
Rohan, I think, but for Gandalf.' 

'Ah, there you lay your finger on the sore that many feel!' said 
Beregond. 'But things may change when Faramir returns. He is bold, more bold 
than many deem; for in these days men are slow to believe that a captain can 




be wise and learned in the scrolls of lore and song, as he is, and yet a man 
of hardihood and swift judgement in the field. But such is Faramir. Less 
reckless and eager than Boromir, but not less resolute. Yet what indeed can 
he do? We cannot assault the mountains of - of yonder realm. Our reach is 
shortened, and we cannot strike till some foe comes within it. Then our hand 
must be heavy!' He smote the hilt of his sword. 

Pippin looked at him: tall and proud and noble, as all the men that he 
had yet seen in that land; and with a glitter in his eye as he thought of 
the battle. 'Alas! my own hand feels as light as a feather,' he thought, but 
he said nothing. 'A pawn did Gandalf say? Perhaps but on the wrong 
chessboard.' 

So they talked until the sun reached its height, and suddenly the 
noon-bells were rung, and there was a stir in the citadel; for all save the 
watchmen were going to their meal. 

'Will you come with me?' said Beregond. 'You may join my mess for this 
day. I do not know to what company you will be assigned; or the Lord may 
hold you at his own command. But you will be welcome. And it will be well to 
meet as many men as you may, while there is yet time.' 

'I shall be glad to come,' said Pippin. 'I am lonely, to tell you the 
truth. I left my best friend behind in Rohan, and I have had no one to talk 
to or jest with. Perhaps I could really join your company? Are you the 
captain? If so, you could take me on, or speak for me?' 

'Nay, nay,' Beregond laughed, 'I am no captain. Neither office nor rank 
nor lordship have I, being but a plain man of arms of the Third Company of 
the Citadel. Yet, Master Peregrin, to be only a man of arms of the Guard of 
the Tower of Gondor is held worthy in the City, and such men have honour in 
the land.' 

'Then it is far beyond me,' said Pippin. 'Take me back to our room, and 
if Gandalf is not there, I will go where you like - as your guest.' 

Gandalf was not in the lodging and had sent no message; so Pippin went 
with Beregond and was made known to the men of the Third Company. And 
it 

seemed that Beregond got as much honour from it as his guest, for Pippin was 
very welcome. There had already been much talk in the citadel about 
Mithrandir's companion and his long closeting with the Lord; and rumour 
declared that a Prince of the Halflings had come out of the North to offer 
allegiance to Gondor and five thousand swords. And some said that when the 




Riders came from Rohan each would bring behind him a halfling warrior, small 
maybe, but doughty. 

Though Pippin had regretfully to destroy this hopeful tale, he could 
not be rid of his new rank, only fitting, men thought, to one befriended by 
Boromir and honoured by the Lord Denethor; and they thanked him for 
coming 

among them, and hung on his words and stories of the outlands, and gave him 
as much food and ale as he could wish. Indeed his only trouble was to be 
’wary' according to the counsel of Gandalf, and not to let his tongue wag 
freely after the manner of a hobbit among friends. 

At length Beregond rose. 'Farewell for this time!' he said. 'I have 
duty now till sundown, as have all the others here, I think. But if you are 
lonely, as you say, maybe you would like a merry guide about the City. My 
son would go with you gladly. A good lad, I may say. If that pleases you, go 
down to the lowest circle and ask for the Old Guesthouse in the Rath 
Celerdain, the Lamp wrights' Street. You will find him there with other lads 
that are remaining in the City. There may be things worth seeing down at the 
Great Gate ere the closing.' 

He went out, and soon after all the others followed. The day was still 
fine, though it was growing hazy, and it was hot for March, even so far 
southwards. Pippin felt sleepy, but the lodging seemed cheerless, and he 
decided to go down and explore the City. He took a few morsels that he had 
saved to Shadowfax, and they were graciously accepted, though the horse 
seemed to have no lack. Then he walked on down many winding ways. 

People stared much as he passed. To his face men were gravely 
courteous, saluting him after the manner of Gondor with bowed head and hands 
upon the breast; but behind him he heard many calls, as those out of doors 
cried to others within to come and see the Prince of the Halflings, the 
companion of Mithrandir. Many used some other tongue than the Common 
Speech, 

but it was not long before he learned at least what was meant by Emil i 
Pheriannath and knew that his title had gone down before him into the City. 

He came at last by arched streets and many fair alleys and pavements to 
the lowest and widest circle, and there he was directed to the Lampwrights' 
Street, a broad way running towards the Great Gate. In it he found the Old 
Guesthouse, a large building of grey weathered stone with two wings running 




back from the street, and between them a narrow greensward, behind which 
was 

the many-windowed house, fronted along its whole width by a pillared porch 
and a flight of steps down on to the grass. Boys were playing among the 
pillars, the only children that Pippin had seen in Minas Tirith, and he 
stopped to look at them. Presently one of them caught sight of him, and with 
a shout he sprang across the grass and came into the street, followed by 
several others. There he stood in front of Pippin, looking him up and down. 

'Greetings!' said the lad. 'Where do you come from? You are a stranger 
in the City.’ 

’I was,’ said Pippin; 'but they say I have become a man of Gondor.' 

'Oh come!' said the lad. 'Then we are all men here. But how old are 
you, and what is your name? I am ten years already, and shall soon be five 
feet. I am taller than you. But then my father is a Guard, one of the 
tallest. What is your father?' 

'Which question shall I answer first?' said Pippin. 'My father farms 
the lands round Whitwell near Tuckborough in the Shire. I am nearly 
twenty-nine, so I pass you there; though I am but four feet, and not likely 
to grow any more, save sideways.' 

'Twenty-nine!' said the lad and whistled. 'Why, you are quite old! As 
old as my uncle Iorlas. Still,' he added hopefully, 'I wager I could stand 
you on your head or lay you on your back.' 

'Maybe you could, if I let you,' said Pippin with a laugh. 'And maybe I 
could do the same to you: we know some wrestling tricks in my little 
country. Where, let me tell you, I am considered uncommonly large and 
strong; and I have never allowed anyone to stand me on my head. So if it 
came to a trial and nothing else would serve, I might have to kill you. For 
when you are older, you will learn that folk are not always what they seem; 
and though you may have taken me for a soft stranger -lad and easy prey, let 
me warn you: I am not, I amahalfling, hard, bold, and wicked!' Pippin 
pulled such a grim face that the boy stepped back a pace, but at once he 
returned with clenched fists and the light of battle in his eye. 

'No!' Pippin laughed. 'Don't believe what strangers say of themselves 
either! I am not a fighter. But it would be politer in any case for the 
challenger to say who he is.' 

The boy drew himself up proudly. 'I am Bergil son of Beregond of the 
Guards,' he said. 




'So I thought,' said Pippin, 'for you look like your father. I know him 
and he sent me to find you.' 

'Then why did you not say so at once?' said Bergil, and suddenly a look 
of dismay came over his face. 'Do not tell me that he has changed his mind, 
and will send me away with the maidens! But no, the last wains have gone.' 

'His message is less bad than that, if not good.' said Pippin. 'He says 
that if you would prefer it to standing me on my head, you might show me 
round the City for a while and cheer my loneliness. I can tell you some 
tales of far countries in return.' 

Bergil clapped his hands, and laughed with relief. 'All is well,' he 
cried. 'Come then! We were soon going to the Gate to look on. We will go 
now.' 

'What is happening there?' 

'The Captains of the Outlands are expected up the South Road ere 
sundown. Come with us and you will see.' 

Bergil proved a good comrade, the best company Pippin had had since he 
parted from Merry, and soon they were laughing and talking gaily as they 
went about the streets, heedless of the many glances that men gave them. 
Before long they found themselves in a throng going towards the Great Gate. 
There Pippin went up much in the esteem of Bergil, for when he spoke his 
name and the pass-word the guard saluted him and let him pass through; and 
what was more, he allowed him to take his companion with him. 

'That is good!' said Bergil. 'We boys are no longer allowed to pass the 
Gate without an elder. Now we shall see better.' 

Beyond the Gate there was a crowd of men along the verge of the road 
and of the great paved space into which all the ways to Minas Tirith ran. 

All eyes were turned southwards, and soon a murmur rose: 'There is dust away 
there! They are coming!' 

Pippin and Bergil edged their way forward to the front of the crowd, 
and waited. Horns sounded at some distance, and the noise of cheering rolled 
towards them like a gathering wind. Then there was a loud trumpet-blast, and 
all about them people were shouting. 

'Forlong! Forlong!' Pippin heard men calling. 'What do they say?' he 
asked. 

'Forlong has come,' Bergil answered; 'old Forlong the Fat, the Lord of 
Lossarnach. That is where my grandsire lives. Hurrah! Here he is. Good old 
Forlong!' 




Leading the line there came walking a big thick -limbed horse, and on it 
sat a man of wide shoulders and huge girth, but old and grey -bearded, yet 
mail-clad and black-helmed and bearing a long heavy spear. Behind him 
marched proudly a dusty line of men, well-armed and bearing great 
battle-axes; grim-faced they were, and shorter and somewhat swarthier than 
any men that Pippin had yet seen in Gondor. 

'Forlong!' men shouted. 'True heart, true friend! Forlong!' But when 
the men of Lossarnach had passed they muttered: ’So few! Two hundreds, 
what 

are they? We hoped for ten times the number. That will be the new tidings of 
the black fleet. They are sparing only a tithe of their strength. Still 
every little is a gain.' 

And so the companies came and were hailed and cheered and passed 
through the Gate, men of the Outlands marching to defend the City of Gondor 
in a dark hour; but always too few, always less than hope looked for or need 
asked. The men of Ringlu Vale behind the son of their lord, Dervorin 
striding on foot: three hundreds. From the uplands of Morthond, the great 
Blackroot Vale, tall Duinhir with his sons, Duilin and Derufin, and five 
hundred bowmen. From the Anfalas, the Langstrand far away, a long line of 
men of many sorts, hunters and herdsmen and men of little villages, scantily 
equipped save for the household of Golasgil their lord. From Lamedon, a few 
grim hillmen without a captain. Fisher-folk of the Ethir, some hundred or 
more spared from the ships. Hirluin the Fair of the Green Hills from Pinnath 
Gelin with three hundreds of gallant green-clad men. And last and proudest, 
Imrahil, Prince of Dol Amroth, kinsman of the Lord, with gilded banners 
bearing his token of the Ship and the Silver Swan, and a company of knights 
in full harness riding grey horses; and behind them seven hundreds of men at 
arms, tall as lords, grey-eyed, dark-haired, singing as they came. 

And that was all, less than three thousands full told. No more would 
come. Their cries and the tramp of their feet passed into the City and died 
away. The onlookers stood silent for a while. Dust hung in the air, for the 
wind had died and the evening was heavy. Already the closing hour was 
drawing nigh, and the red sun had gone behind Mindolluin. Shadow came 
down 

on the City. 

Pippin looked up, and it seemed to him that the sky had grown 
ashen-grey, as if a vast dust and smoke hung above them, and light came 




dully through it. But in the West the dying sun had set all the fume on 
fire, and now Mindolluin stood black against a burning smoulder flecked with 
embers. ’So ends a fair day in wrath!' he said forgetful of the lad at his 
side. 

’So it will, if I have not returned before the sundown-bells,' said 
Bergil. 'Come! There goes the trumpet for the closing of the Gate.' 

Hand in hand they went back into the City, the last to pass the Gate 
before it was shut; and as they reached the Lampwrights' Street all the 
bells in the towers tolled solemnly. Lights sprang in many windows, and from 
the houses and wards of the men at arms along the walls there came the sound 
of song. 

'Farewell for this time,' said Bergil. 'Take my greetings to my 
ifather, and thank him for the company that he sent. Come again soon, I beg. 
Almost I wish now that there was no war, for we might have had some merry 
times. We might have journeyed to Lossarnach, to my grandsire's house; it is 
good to be there in Spring, the woods and fields are full of flowers. But 
maybe we will go thither together yet. They will never overcome our Lord, 
and my father is very valiant. Farewell and return!' 

They parted and Pippin hurried back towards the citadel. It seemed a 
long way, and he grew hot and very hungry; and night closed down swift and 
dark. Not a star pricked the sky. He was late for the daymeal in the mess, 
and Beregond greeted him gladly, and sat him at his side to hear news of his 
son. After the meal Pippin stayed a while, and then took his leave, for a 
strange gloom was on him, and now he desired very much to see Gandalf 
again. 

'Can you find your way?' said Beregond at the door of the small hall, 
on the north side of the citadel, where they had sat. 'It is a black night, 
and all the blacker since orders came that lights are to be dimmed within 
the City, and none are to shine out from the walls. And I can give you news 
of another order: you will be summoned to the Lord Denethor early tomorrow. 
I fear you will not be for the Third Company. Still we may hope to meet 
again. Farewell and sleep in peace!' 

The lodging was dark, save for a little lantern set on the table. 

Gandalf was not there. Gloom settled still more heavily on Pippin. He 
climbed on the bench and tried to peer out of a window, but it was like 
looking into a pool of ink. He got down and closed the shutter and went to 
bed. For a while he lay and listened for sounds of Gandalf s return, and 




then he fell into an uneasy sleep. 

In the night he was wakened by a light, and he saw that Gandalf had 
come and was pacing to and fro in the room beyond the curtain of the alcove. 
There were candles on the table and rolls of parchment. He heard the wizard 
sigh, and mutter: 'When will Faramir return?' 

'Hullo!' said Pippin, poking his head round the curtain. 'I thought you 
had forgotten all about me. I am glad to see you back. It has been a long 
day.' 

'But the night will be too short,' said Gandalf. 'I have come back 
here, for I must have a little peace, alone. You should sleep, in a bed 
while you still may. At the sunrise I shall take you to the Lord Denethor 
again. No, when the summons comes, not at sunrise. The Darkness has begun. 
There will be no dawn.' 




Chapter 2. The Passing of the Grey Company 



Gandalf was gone, and the thudding hoofs of Shadowfax were lost in the 
night, when Merry came back to Aragorn. He had only a light bundle, for he 
had lost his pack at Parth Galen, and all he had was a few useful things he 
had picked up among the wreckage of Isengard. Hasufel was already saddled. 
Legolas and Gimli with their horse stood close by. 

'So four of the Company still remain,' said Aragorn. 'We will ride on 
together. But we shall not go alone, as I thought. The king is now 
determined to set out at once. Since the coming of the winged shadow, he 
desires to return to the hills under cover of night.' 

'And then whither?' said Legolas. 

'I cannot say yet,' Aragorn answered. 'As for the king, he will go to 
the muster that he commanded at Edoras, four nights from now. And there, I 
think, he will hear tidings of war, and the Riders of Rohan will go down to 
Minas Tirith. But for myself, and any that will go with me . . .' 

'I for one!' cried Legolas. 'And Gimli with him!' said the Dwarf. 

'Well, for myself,' said Aragorn, 'it is dark before me. I must go down 
also to Minas Tirith, but I do not yet see the road. An hour long prepared 
approaches.' 

'Don't leave me behind!' said Merry. 'I have not been of much use yet; 
but I don't want to be laid aside, like baggage to be called for when all is 
over. I don't think the Riders will want to be bothered with me now. Though, 
of course, the king did say that I was to sit by him when he came to his 
house and tell him all about the Shire.' 

'Yes,' said Aragorn, 'and your road lies with him, I think, Merry. But 
do not look for mirth at the ending. It will be long, I fear, ere Thjoden 
sits at ease again in Meduseld. Many hopes will wither in this bitter 
Spring.' 

Soon all were ready to depart: twenty-four horses, with Gimli behind 
Legolas, and Merry in front of Aragorn. Presently they were riding swiftly 
through the night. They had not long passed the mounds at the Fords of Isen, 
when a Rider galloped up from the rear of their line. 

'My lord,' he said to the king, 'there are horsemen behind us. As we 
crossed the fords I thought that I heard them. Now we are sure. They are 




overtaking us, riding hard.' 

Thjoden at once called a halt. The Riders turned about and seized their 
spears. Aragorn dismounted and set Merry on the ground, and drawing his 
sword he stood by the king’s stirrup. Jomer and his esquire rode back to the 
rear. Merry felt more like unneeded baggage than ever, and he wondered, if 
there was a fight, what he should do. Supposing the king's small escort was 
trapped and overcome, but he escaped into the darkness - alone in the wild 
fields of Rohan with no idea of where he was in all the endless miles? 'No 
good!' he thought. He drew his sword and tightened his belt. 

The sinking moon was obscured by a great sailing cloud, but suddenly it 
rode out clear again. Then they all heard the sound of hoofs, and at the 
same moment they saw dark shapes coming swiftly on the path from the fords. 
The moonlight glinted here and there on the points of spears. The number of 
the pursuers could not be told, but they seemed no fewer than the king's 
escort, at the least. 

When they were some fifty paces off, Jomer cried in a loud voice: 

'Halt! Halt! Who rides in Rohan?' 

The pursuers brought their steeds to a sudden stand. A silence 
followed: and then in the moonlight, a horseman could be seen dismounting 
and walking slowly forward. His hand showed white as he held it up, palm 
outward, in token of peace; but the king's men gripped their weapons. At ten 
paces the man stopped. He was tall, a dark standing shadow. Then his clear 
voice rang out. 

'Rohan? Rohan did you say? That is a glad word. We seek that land in 
haste from long afar.' 

'You have found it,' said Jomer. 'When you crossed the fords yonder you 
entered it. But it is the realm of Thjoden the King. None ride here save by 
his leave. Who are you? And what is your haste?' 

'Halbarad D®nadan, Ranger of the North I am,' cried the man. 'We seek 
one Aragorn son of Arathorn, and we heard that he was in Rohan.' 

'And you have found him also!' cried Aragorn. Giving his reins to 
Merry, he ran forward and embraced the newcomer. 'Halbarad!' he said. 'Of 
all joys this is the least expected!' 

Merry breathed a sigh of relief. He had thought that this was some last 
trick of Saruman's, to waylay the king while he had only a few men about 
him; but it seemed that there would be no need to die in Thjoden's defence, 
not yet at any rate. He sheathed his sword. 




'All is well,' said Aragorn, turning back. 'Here are some of my own kin 
from the far land where I dwelt. But why they come, and how many they be, 
Halbarad shall tell us.' 

'I have thirty with me,' said Halbarad. 'That is all of our kindred 
that could be gathered in haste; but the brethren Elladan and Elrohir have 
ridden with us, desiring to go to the war. We rode as swiftly as we might 
when your summons came.' 

'But I did not summon you,' said Aragorn, 'save only in wish. My 
thoughts have often turned to you, and seldom more than tonight; yet I have 
sent no word. But come! All such matters must wait. You find us riding in 
haste and danger. Ride with us now, if the king will give his leave.' 

Thjoden was indeed glad of the news. 'It is well!' he said. 'If these 
kinsmen be in any way like to yourself, my lord Aragorn, thirty such knights 
will be a strength that cannot be counted by heads.' 

Then the Riders set out again, and Aragorn for a while rode with the 
D®nedain; and when they had spoken of tidings in the North and in the South, 
Elrohir said to him: 

'I bring word to you from my father: The days are short. If thou art in 
haste, remember the Paths of the Dead.' 

'Always my days have seemed to me too short to achieve my desire,' 
answered Aragorn. 'But great indeed will be my haste ere I take that road.' 

'That will soon be seen,' said Elrohir. 'But let us speak no more of 
these things upon the open road!' 

And Aragorn said to Halbarad: 'What is that that you bear, kinsman?' 

For he saw that instead of a spear he bore a tall staff, as it were a 
standard, but it was close-furled in a black cloth bound about with many 
thongs. 

'It is a gift that I bring you from the Lady of Rivendell,' answered 
Halbarad. 'She wrought it in secret, and long was the making. But she also 
sends word to you: The days now are short. Either our hope cometh, or all 
hopes end. Therefore I send thee what I have made for thee. Fare well, 
Elfstone!' 

And Aragorn said: 'Now I know what you bear. Bear it still for me a 
while!' And he turned and looked away to the North under the great stars, 
and then he fell silent and spoke no more while the night's journey lasted. 

The night was old and the East grey when they rode up at last from 
Deeping-coomb and came back to the Hornburg. There they were to lie and rest 




for a brief while and take counsel. 

Merry slept until he was roused by Legolas and Gimli. The Sun is 
high,' said Legolas. 'All others are up and doing. Come, Master Sluggard, 
and look at this place while you may!' 

'There was a battle here three nights ago,' said Gimli, 'and here 
Legolas and I played a game that I won only by a single ore. Come and see 
how it was! And there are caves, Merry, caves of wonder! Shall we visit 
them, Legolas, do you think?' 

'Nay! There is no time,' said the Elf. 'Do not spoil the wonder with 
haste! I have given you my word to return hither with you, if a day of peace 
and freedom comes again. But it is now near to noon, and at that hour we 
eat, and then set out again, I hear.' 

Merry got up and yawned. His few hours' sleep had not been nearly 
enough; he was tired and rather dismal. He missed Pippin, and felt that he 
was only a burden, while everybody was making plans for speed in a business 
that he did not fully understand. 'Where is Aragorn?' he asked. 

'In a high chamber of the Burg,' said Legolas. 'He has neither rested 
nor slept, I think. He went thither some hours ago, saying that he must take 
thought, and only his kinsman, Halbarad, went with him; but some dark doubt 
or care sits on him.' 

'They are a strange company, these newcomers,' said Gimli. 'Stout men 
and lordly they are, and the Riders of Rohan look almost as boys beside 
them; for they are grim men of face, worn like weathered rocks for the most 
part, even as Aragorn himself; and they are silent.' 

'But even as Aragorn they are courteous, if they break their silence.' 
said Legolas. 'And have you marked the brethren Elladan and Elrohir? Less 
sombre is their gear than the others', and they are fair and gallant as 
Elven-lords; and that is not to be wondered at in the sons of Elrond of 
Rivendell.' 

'Why have they come? Have you heard?' asked Merry. He had now dressed, 
and he flung his grey cloak about his shoulders; and the three passed out 
together towards the ruined gate of the Burg. 

'They answered a summons, as you heard,' said Gimli. 'Word came to 
Rivendell, they say: Aragorn has need of his kindred. Let the D®nedain ride 
to him in Rohan! But whence this message came they are now in doubt. 

Gandalf 

sent it, I would guess.' 




'Nay, Galadriel,' said Legolas. 'Did she not speak through Gandalf of 
the ride of the Grey Company from the North?' 

'Yes, you have it,' said Gimli. 'The Lady of the Wood! She read many 
hearts and desires. Now why did not we wish for some of our own kinsfolk, 
Legolas?' 

Legolas stood before the gate and turned his bright eyes away north and 
east, and his fair face was troubled. 'I do not think that any would come,' 
he answered. 'They have no need to ride to war; war already marches on their 
own lands.' 

For a while the three companions walked together, speaking of this and 
that turn of the battle, and they went down from the broken gate, and passed 
the mounds of the fallen on the greensward beside the road, until they stood 
on Helm's Dike and looked into the Coomb. The Death Down already stood 
there, black and tall and stony, and the great trampling and scoring of the 
grass by the Huorns could be plainly seen. The Dunlendings and many men of 
the garrison of the Burg were at work on the Dike or in the fields and about 
the battered walls behind; yet all seemed strangely quiet: a weary valley 
resting after a great storm. Soon they turned back and went to the midday 
meal in the hall of the Burg. 

The king was already there, and as soon as they entered he called for 
Merry and had a seat set for him at his side. 'It is not as I would have 
it,' said Thjoden; 'for this is little like my fair house in Edoras. And 
your friend is gone, who should also be here. But it may be long ere we sit, 
you and I, at the high table in Meduseld; there will be no time for feasting 
when I return thither. But come now! Eat and drink, and let us speak 
together while we may. And then you shall ride with me.' 

'May I?' said Merry, surprised and delighted. 'That would be splendid!' 

He had never felt more grateful for any kindness in words. 'I am afraid I am 
only in everybody's way,' he stammered; 'but I should like to do anything I 
could, you know.' 

'I doubt it not,' said the king. 'I have had a good hill-pony made 
ready for you. He will bear you as swift as any horse by the roads that we 
shall take. For I will ride from the Burg by mountain paths, not by the 
plain, and so come to Edoras by way of Dunharrow where the Lady Jowyn 
awaits 

me. You shall be my esquire, if you will. Is there gear of war in this 
place, Jomer, that my sword-thain could use?' 




'There are no great weapon-hoards here, lord.' answered Jomer. 'Maybe a 
light helm might be found to fit him; but we have no mail or sword for one 
of his stature.' 

'I have a sword,' said Merry, climbing from his seat, and drawing from 
its black sheath his small bright blade. Filled suddenly with love for this 
old man, he knelt on one knee, and took his hand and kissed it. 'May I lay 
the sword of Meriadoc of the Shire on your lap Thjoden King?' he cried. 
'Receive my service, if you will!' 

'Gladly will I take it,' said the king; and laying his long old hands 
upon the brown hair of the hobbit; he blessed him. 'Rise now, Meriadoc, 
esquire of Rohan of the household of Meduseld!' he said. 'Take your sword 
and bear it unto good fortune!' 

'As a father you shall be to me,' said Merry. 

'For a little while,' said Thjoden. 

They talked then together as they ate, until presently Jomer spoke. 'It 
is near the hour that we set for our going, lord,' he said. 'Shall I bid men 
sound the horns? But where is Aragorn? His place is empty and he has not 
eaten.' 

'We will make ready to ride,' said Thjoden; 'but let word be sent to 
the Lord Aragorn that the hour is nigh.' 

The king with his guard and Merry at his side passed down from the gate 
of the Burg to where the Riders were assembling on the green. Many were 
already mounted. It would be a great company; for the king was leaving only 
a small garrison in the Burg, and all who could be spared were riding to the 
weapontake at Edoras. A thousand spears had indeed already ridden away at 
night; but still there would be some five hundred more to go with the king, 
for the most part men from the fields and dales of Westfold. 

A little apart the Rangers sat, silent, in an ordered company, armed 
with spear and bow and sword. They were clad in cloaks of dark grey, and 
their hoods were cast now over helm and head. Their horses were strong and 
of proud bearing, but rough-haired; and one stood there without a rider, 
Aragorn's own horse that they had brought from the North; Roheryn was his 
name. There was no gleam of stone or gold, nor any fair thing in all their 
gear and harness: nor did their riders bear any badge or token, save only 
that each cloak was pinned upon the left shoulder by a brooch of silver 
shaped like a rayed star. 

The king mounted his horse, Snowmane, and Merry sat beside him on his 




pony: Stybba was his name. Presently Jomer came out from the gate, and with 
him was Aragorn, and Halbarad bearing the great staff close-furled in black, 
and two tall men, neither young nor old So much alike were they, the sons of 
Elrond, that few could tell them apart: dark -haired, grey-eyed, and their 
faces elven-fair, clad alike in bright mail beneath cloaks of silver-grey. 
Behind them walked Legolas and Gimli. But Merry had eyes only for 
Aragorn, 

so startling was the change that he saw in him, as if in one night many 
years had fallen on his head. Grim was his face, grey-hued and weary. 

'I am troubled in mind, lord,' he said, standing by the king's horse. 

'I have heard strange words, and I see new perils far off. I have laboured 
long in thought, and now I fear that I must change my purpose. Tell me, 
Thjoden, you ride now to Dunharrow, how long will it be ere you come there?' 

'It is now a full hour past noon,' said Jomer. 'Before the night of the 
third day from now we should come to the Hold. The Moon will then be one 
night past his full, and the muster that the king commanded will be held the 
day after. More speed we cannot make, if the strength of Rohan is to be 
gathered.' 

Aragorn was silent for a moment. 'Three days,' he murmured, 'and the 
muster of Rohan will only be begun. But I see that it cannot now be 
hastened.' He looked up, and it seemed that he had made some decision; his 
face was less troubled. Then, by our leave, lord, I must take new counsel 
for myself and my kindred. We must ride our own road, and no longer in 
secret. For me the time of stealth has passed. I will ride east by the 
swiftest way, and I will take the Paths of the Dead.' 

'The Paths of the Dead!' said Thjoden, and trembled. 'Why do you speak 
of them?' Jomer turned and gazed at Aragorn, and it seemed to Merry that the 
faces of the Riders that sat within hearing turned pale at the words. 'If 
there be in truth such paths,' said Thjoden, 'their gate is in Dunharrow; 
but no living man may pass it.' 

'Alas! Aragorn my friend!' said Jomer. 'I had hoped that we should ride 
to war together; but if you seek the Paths of the Dead, then our parting is 
come, and it is little likely that we shall ever meet again under the Sun.' 

'That road I will take, nonetheless,' said Aragorn. 'But I say to you, 

Jomer, that in battle we may yet meet again, though all the hosts of Mordor 
should stand between.' 

'You will do as you will, my lord Aragorn,' said Thjoden. 'It is your 




doom, maybe, to tread strange paths that others dare not. This parting 
grieves me, and my strength is lessened by it; but now I must take the 
mountain-roads and delay no longer. Farewell!' 

’Farewell, lord!' said Aragorn. 'Ride unto great renown! Farewell, 

Merry! I leave you in good hands, better than we hoped when we hunted the 
ores to Fangorn. Legolas and Gimli will still hunt with me, I hope; but we 
shall not forget you.' 

'Good-bye!' said Merry. Fie could find no more to say. Fie felt very 
small, and he was puzzled and depressed by all these gloomy words. More than 
ever he missed the unquenchable cheerfulness of Pippin. The Riders were 
ready, and their horses were fidgeting; he wished they would start arid get 
it over. 

Now Thjoden spoke to Jomer, and he lifted up his hand and cried aloud, 
and with that word the Riders set forth. They rode over the Dike and down 
the Coomb, and then, turning swiftly eastwards, they took a path that 
skirted the foothills for a mile or so, until bending south it passed back 
among the hills and disappeared from view. Aragorn rode to the Dike and 
watched till the king's men were far down the Coomb. Then he turned to 
Halbarad. 

'There go three that I love, and the smallest not the least,' he said. 

'He knows not to what end he rides; yet if he knew, he still would go on.' 

'A little people, but of great worth are the Shire-folk,' said 
Halbarad. 'Little do they know of our long labour for the safekeeping of 
their borders, and yet I grudge it not.' 

'And now our fates are woven together,' said Aragorn. 'And yet, alas! 
here we must part. Well, I must eat a little, and then we also must hasten 
away. Come, Legolas and Gimli! I must speak with you as I eat.' 

Together they went back into the Burg; yet for some time Aragorn sat 
silent at the table in the hall, and the others waited for him to speak. 

'Come!' said Legolas at last. 'Speak and be comforted, and shake off the 
shadow! What has happened since we came back to this grim place in the grey 
morning?' 

'A struggle somewhat grimmer for my part than the battle of the 
Hornburg,' answered Aragorn. 'I have looked in the Stone of Orthanc, my 
friends.' 

'You have looked in that accursed stone of wizardry!' exclaimed Gimli 
with fear and astonishment in his face. 'Did you say aught to - him? Even 




Gandalf feared that encounter.' 

'You forget to whom you speak,' said Aragorn sternly, and his eyes 
glinted. 'Did I not openly proclaim my title before the doors ofEdoras? 

What do you fear that I should say to him? Nay, Gimli,' he said in a softer 
voice, and the grimness left his face, and he looked like one who has 
laboured in sleepless pain for many nights. 'Nay, my friends, I and the 
lawful master of the Stone, and I had both the right and the strength to use 
it, or so I judged. The right cannot be doubted. The strength was enough - 
barely.' 

He drew a deep breath. 'It was a bitter struggle, and the weariness is 
slow to pass. I spoke no word to him, and in the end I wrenched the Stone to 
my own will. That alone he will find hard to endure. And he beheld me. Yes, 
Master Gimli, he saw me, but in other guise than you see me here. If that 
will aid him, then I have done ill. But I do not think so. To know that I 
lived and walked the earth was a blow to his heart, I deem; for he knew it 
not till now. The eyes in Orthanc did not see through the armour of Thjoden; 
but Sauron has not forgotten Isildur and the sword of Elendil. Now in the 
very hour of his great designs the heir of Isildur and the Sword are 
revealed; for 1 showed the blade re-forged to him. He is not so mighty yet 
that he is above fear; nay, doubt ever gnaws him.' 

'But he wields great dominion, nonetheless,' said Gimli; 'and now he 
will strike more swiftly.' 

'The hasty stroke goes oft astray,' said Aragorn. 'We must press our 
Enemy, and no longer wait upon him for the move. See my friends, when I had 
mastered the Stone, I learned many things. A grave peril I saw coming 
unlooked-for upon Gondor from the South that will draw off great strength 
from the defence of Minas Tirith. If it is not countered swiftly, I deem 
that the City will be lost ere ten days be gone.' 

'Then lost it must be,' said Gimli. 'For what help is there to send 
thither, and how could it come there in time?' 

'I have no help to send, therefore I must go myself,' said Aragorn. 

'But there is only one way through the mountains that will bring me to the 
coastlands before all is lost. That is the Paths of the Dead.' 

'The Paths of the Dead!' said Gimli. 'It is a fell name; and little to 
the liking to the Men of Rohan, as I saw. Can the living use such a road and 
not perish? And even if you pass that way, what will so few avail to counter 
the strokes of Mordor?' 




’The living have never used that road since the coming of the 
Rohirrim,' said Aragorn, 'for it is closed to them. But in this dark hour 
the heir of Isildur may use it, if he dare. Listen! This is the word that 
the sons of Elrond bring to me from their father in Rivendell, wisest in 
lore: Bid Aragorn remember the words of the seer, and the Paths of the 
Dead' 

'And what may be the words of the seer?' said Legolas. 

"Thus spoke Malbeth the Seer, in the days of Arvedui, last king at 
Fornost,' said Aragorn: 

Over the land there lies a long shadow, 
westward reaching wings of darkness. 

The Tower trembles; to the tombs of kings 
doom approaches. The Dead awaken; 
for the hour is come for the oathbreakers ; 
at the Stone of Erech they shall stand again 
and hear there a horn in the hills ringing. 

Whose shall the horn be? Who shall call them 
from the prey twilight, the forgotten people? 

The heir of him to whom the oath they swore. 

From the North shall he come, need shall drive him: 
he shall pass the Door to the Paths of the Dead. 

'Dark ways doubtless, said Gimli, but no darker than these staves are 
to me.' 

'If you would understand them better, then I bid you come with me,' 
said Aragorn; 'for that way I now shall take. But I do not go gladly; only 
need drives me. Therefore, only of your free will would I have you come, for 
you will find both toil and great fear, and maybe worse.' 

'I will go with you even on the Paths of the Dead, and to whatever, end 
they may lead,' said Gimli. 

'I also will come,' said Legolas, 'for I do not fear the Dead.' 

'I hope that the forgotten people will not have forgotten how to 
fight,' said Gimli; 'for otherwise I see not why we should trouble them.' 

'That we shall know if ever we come to Erech,' said Aragorn. 'But the 
oath that they broke was to fight against Sauron, and they must fight 
therefore, if they are to fulfil it. For at Erech there stands yet a black 
stone that was brought, it was said, from N®menor by Isildur; and it was set 
upon a hill, and upon it the King of the Mountains swore allegiance to him 




in the beginning of the realm of Gondor. But when Sauron returned and grew 
in might again, Isildur summoned the Men of the Mountains to fulfil their 
oath, and they would not: for they had worshipped Sauron in the Dark Years. 

’Then Isildur said to their king: "Thou shalt be the last king. And if 
the West prove mightier than thy Black Master, this curse I lay upon thee 
and thy folk: to rest never until your oath is fulfilled. For this war will 
last through years uncounted, and you shall be summoned once again ere the 
end." And they fled before the wrath of Isildur, and did not dare to go 
forth to war on Sauron's part; and they hid themselves in secret places in 
the mountains and had no dealings with other men, but slowly dwindled in the 
barren hills. And the terror of the Sleepless Dead lies about the Hill of 
Erech and all places where that people lingered. But that way I must go, 
since there are none living to help me.' 

He stood up. ’Come!' he cried, and drew his sword, and it flashed in 
the twilit hall of the Burg. 'To the Stone of Erech! I seek the Paths of the 
Dead. Come with me who will!' 

Legolas and Gimli made no answer, but they rose and followed Aragorn 
from the hall. On the green there waited, still and silent, the hooded 
Rangers. Legolas and Gimli mounted. Aragorn sprang upon Roheryn. 

Then 

Halbarad lifted a great horn, and the blast of it echoed in Helm's Deep; and 
with that they leapt away, riding down the Coomb like thunder, while all the 
men that were left on Dike or Burg stared in amaze. 

And while Thjoden went by slow paths in the hills, the Grey Company 
passed swiftly over the plain, and on the next day in the afternoon they 
came to Edoras; and there they halted only briefly, ere they passed up the 
valley, and so came to Dunharrow as darkness fell. 

The Lady Jowyn greeted them and was glad of their coming; for no 
mightier men had she seen than the D®nedain and the fair sons of Elrond; but 
on Aragorn most of all her eyes rested. And when they sat at supper with 
her, they talked together, and she heard of all that had passed since 
Thjoden rode away, concerning which only hasty tidings had yet reached her; 
and when she heard of the battle in Helm's Deep and the great slaughter of 
their foes, and of the charge of Thjoden and his knights, then her eyes 
shone. 

But at last she said: 'Lords, you are weary and shall now go to your 
beds with such ease as can be contrived in haste. But tomorrow fairer 




housing shall be found for you.' 

But Aragorn said: 'Nay, lady, be not troubled for us! If we may lie 
here tonight and break our fast tomorrow, it will be enough. For I ride on 
an errand most urgent, and with the first light of morning we must go.' 

She smiled on him and said: 'Then it was kindly done, lord, to ride so 
many miles out of your way to bring tidings to Jowyn, and to speak with her 
in her exile.' 

'Indeed no man would count such a journey wasted,' said Aragorn; 'and 
yet, lady, I could not have come hither, if it were not that the road which 
I must take leads me to Dunharrow.' 

And she answered as one that likes not what is said: "Then, lord, you 
are astray; for out of Harrowdale no road runs east or south; and you had 
best return as you came.' 

'Nay, lady,' said he, 'I am not astray; for I walked in this land ere 
you were born to grace it. There is a road out of this valley, and that road 
I shall take. Tomorrow I shall ride by the Paths of the Dead.' 

Then she stared at him as one that is stricken, and her face blanched, 
and for long she spoke no more, while all sat silent. 'But, Aragorn,' she 
said at last, 'is it then your errand to seek death? For that is all that 
you will find on that road. They do not suffer the living to pass.' 

'They may suffer me to pass,' said Aragorn; 'but at the least I will 
adventure it. No other road will serve.' 

'But this is madness,' she said. 'For here are men of renown and 
prowess, whom you should not take into the shadows, but should lead to war, 
where men are needed. I beg you to remain and ride with my brother; for then 
all our hearts will be gladdened, and our hope be the brighter.' 

'It is not madness, lady,' he answered; 'for I go on a path appointed. 

But those who follow me do so of their free will; and if they wish now to 
remain and ride with the Rohirrim, they may do so. But I shall take the 
Paths of the Dead, alone, if needs be.' 

Then they said no more, and they ate in silence; but her eyes were ever 
upon Aragorn, and the others saw that she was in great torment of mind. At 
length they arose, and took their leave of the Lady, and thanked her for her 
care, and went to their rest. 

But as Aragorn came to the booth where he was to lodge with Legolas and 
Gimli, and his companions had gone in. there came the Lady Jowyn after him 
and called to him. He turned and saw her as a glimmer in the night, for she 




was clad in white; but her eyes were on fire. 

'Aragorn,' she said, ’why will you go on this deadly road?' 

’Because I must,' he said. 'Only so can I see any hope of doing my part 
in the war against Sauron. I do not choose paths of peril, Jowyn. Were I to 
go where my heart dwells, far in the North I would now be wandering in the 
fair valley of Rivendell.' 

For a while she was silent, as if pondering what this might mean. Then 
suddenly she laid her hand on his arm. 'You are a stern lord and resolute,' 
she said; 'and thus do men win renown.' She paused. 'Lord.' she said, 'if 
you must go, then let me ride in your following. For I am weary of skulking 
in the hills, and wish to face peril and battle.' 

'Your duty is with your people,' he answered. 

'Too often have I heard of duty,' she cried. 'But am I not of the House 
of Eorl, a shieldmaiden and not a dry-nurse? I have waited on faltering feet 
long enough. Since they falter no longer, it seems, may I not now spend my 
life as I will?' 

'Few may do that with honour,' he answered. 'But as for you, lady: did 
you not accept the charge to govern the people until their lord's return? If 
you had not been chosen, then some marshal or captain would have been set in 
the same place, and he could not ride away from his charge, were he weary of 
it or no.' 

'Shall I always be chosen?' she said bitterly. 'Shall I always be left 
behind when the Riders depart, to mind the house while they win renown, and 
find food and beds when they return?' 

'A time may come soon,' said he, 'when none will return. Then there 
will be need of valour without renown, for none shall remember the deeds 
that are done in the last defence of your homes. Yet the deeds will not be 
less valiant because they are unpraised.' 

And she answered: 'All your words are but to say: you are a woman, and 
your part is in the house. But when the men have died in battle and honour, 
you have leave to be burned in the house, for the men will need it no more. 
But I am of the House of Eorl and not a serving-woman. I can ride and wield 
blade, and I do not fear either pain or death.' 

'What do you fear, lady?' he asked. 

'A cage,' she said. 'To stay behind bars, until use and old age accept 
them, and all chance of doing great deeds is gone beyond recall or desire.' 

'And yet you counselled me not to adventure on the road that I had 




chosen, because it is perilous?' 

’So may one counsel another,' she said. 'Yet I do not bid you flee from 
peril, but to ride to battle where your sword may win renown and victory. I 
would not see a thing that is high and excellent cast away needlessly.' 

'Nor would I,' he said. 'Therefore I say to you, lady: Stay! For you 
have no errand to the South.' 

'Neither have those others who go with thee. They go only because they 
would not be parted from thee - because they love thee.' Then she turned and 
vanished into the night. 

When the light of day was come into the sky but the sun was not yet 
risen above the high ridges in the East, Aragorn made ready to depart. His 
company was all mounted, and he was about to leap into the saddle, when the 
Lady Jowyn came to bid them farewell. She was clad as a Rider and girt with 
a sword. In her hand she bore a cup, and she set it to her lips and drank a 
little, wishing them good speed; and then she gave the cup to Aragorn, and 
he drank, and he said: 'Farewell, Lady of Rohan! I drink to the fortunes of 
your House, and of you, and of all your people. Say to your brother: beyond 
the shadows we may meet again!' 

Then it seemed to Gimli and Legolas who were nearby that she wept, and 
in one so stern and proud that seemed the more grievous. But she said: 
'Aragorn, wilt thou go?' 

'I will,' he said. 

'Then wilt thou not let me ride with this company, as I have asked?' 

'I will not, lady,' he said. 'For that I could not grant without leave 
of the king and of your brother; and they will not return until tomorrow. 

But I count now every hour, indeed every minute. Farewell!' 

Then she fell on her knees, saying: 'I beg thee!' 

'Nay, lady,' he said, and taking her by the hand he raised her. Then he 
kissed her hand, and sprang into the saddle, and rode away, and did not look 
back; and only those who knew him well and were near to him saw the pain 
that he bore. 

But Jowyn stood still as a figure carven in stone, her hands clenched 
at her sides, and she watched them until they passed into the shadows under 
the black Dwimorberg, the Haunted Mountain, in which was the Gate of the 
Dead. When they were lost to view, she turned, stumbling as one that is 
blind, and went back to her lodging. But none of her folk saw this parting, 
for they hid themselves in fear and would not come forth until the day was 




up, and the reckless strangers were gone. 

And some said: 'They are Elvish wights. Let them go where they belong, 
into the dark places, and never return. The times are evil enough.' 

The light was still grey as they rode, for the sun had not yet climbed 
over the black ridges of the Haunted Mountain before them. A dread fell on 
them, even as they passed between the lines of ancient stones and so came to 
the Dimholt. There under the gloom of black trees that not even Legolas 
could long endure they found a hollow place opening at the mountain's root, 
and right in their path stood a single mighty stone like a finger of doom. 

'My blood runs chill,' said Gimli, but the others were silent, and his 
voice fell dead on the dank fir-needles at his feet. The horses would not 
pass the threatening stone, until the riders dismounted and led them about. 
And so they came at last deep into the glen; and there stood a sheer wall of 
rock, and in the wall the Dark Door gaped before them like the mouth of 
night. Signs and figures were carved above its wide arch too dim to read, 
and fear flowed from it like a grey vapour. 

The company halted, and there was not a heart among them that did not 
quail, unless it were the heart of Legolas of the Elves, for whom the ghosts 
of Men have no terror. 

'This is an evil door,' said Halbarad, 'and my death lies beyond it. I 
will dare to pass it nonetheless; but no horse will enter.' 

'But we must go in, and therefore the horses must go too,' said 
Aragorn. 'Lor if ever we come through this darkness, many leagues lie 
beyond, and every hour that is lost there will bring the triumph of Sauron 
nearer. Lollow me!' 

Then Aragorn led the way, and such was the strength of his will in that 
hour that all the D®nedain and their horses followed him. And indeed the 
love that the horses of the Rangers bore for their riders was so great that 
they were willing to face even the terror of the Door, if their masters' 
hearts were steady as they walked beside them. But Arod, the horse of Rohan, 
refused the way, and he stood sweating and trembling in a fear that was 
grievous to see. Then Legolas laid his hands on his eyes and sang some words 
that went soft in the gloom, until he suffered himself to be led, and 
Legolas passed in. And there stood Gimli the Dwarf left all alone. 

His knees shook, and he was wroth with himself. 'Here is a thing 
unheard of!' he said. 'An Elf will go underground and a Dwarf dare not!' 
With that he plunged in. But it seemed to him that he dragged his feet like 




lead over the threshold; and at once a blindness came upon him, even upon 
Gimli Gluin’s son who had walked unafraid in many deep places of the world. 

Aragorn had brought torches from Dunharrow, and now he went ahead 
bearing one aloft; and Elladan with another went at the rear, and Gimli, 
stumbling behind, strove to overtake him. He could see nothing but the dim 
flame of the torches; but if the company halted, there seemed an endless 
whisper of voices all about him, a murmur of words in no tongue that he had 
ever heard before. 

Nothing assailed the company nor withstood their passage, and yet 
steadily fear grew on the Dwarf as he went on: most of all because he knew 
now that there could be no turning back; all the paths behind were thronged 
by an unseen host that followed in the dark. 

So time unreckoned passed, until Gimli saw a sight that he was ever 
afterwards loth to recall. The road was wide, as far as he could judge, but 
now the company came suddenly into a great empty space, and there were no 
longer any walls upon either side. The dread was so heavy on him that he 
could hardly walk. Away to the left something glittered in the gloom as 
Aragorn's torch drew near. Then Aragorn halted and went to look what it 
might be. 

'Does he feel no fear?' muttered the Dwarf. 'In any other cave Gimli 
Gluin's son would have been the first to run to the gleam of gold. But not 
here! Let it lie!' 

Nonetheless he drew near, and saw Aragorn kneeling, while Elladan held 
aloft both torches. Before him were the bones of a mighty man. He had been 
clad in mail, and still his harness lay there whole; for the cavern's air 
was as dry as dust, and his hauberk was gilded. His belt was of gold and 
garnets, and rich with gold was the helm upon his bony head face downward on 
the floor. He had fallen near the far wall of the cave, as now could be 
seen, and before him stood a stony door closed fast: his finger -bones were 
still clawing at the cracks. A notched and broken sword lay by him, as if he 
had hewn at the rock in his last despair. 

Aragorn did not touch him, but after gazing silently for a while he 
rose and sighed. 'Hither shall the flowers of simbelmynl come never unto 
world's end,' he murmured. 'Nine mounds and seven there are now green with 
grass, and through all the long years he has lain at the door that he could 
not unlock. Whither does it lead? Why would he pass? None shall ever know! 

'For that is not my errand!' he cried, turning back and speaking to the 




whispering darkness behind. 'Keep your hoards and your secrets hidden in the 
Accursed Years! Speed only we ask. Let us pass, and then come! I summon 
you 

to the Stone of Erech!' 

There was no answer, unless it were an utter silence more dreadful than 
the whispers before; and then a chill blast came in which the torches 
flickered and went out, and could not be rekindled. Of the time that 
followed, one hour or many, Gimli remembered little. The others pressed on, 
but he was ever hindmost, pursued by a groping horror that seemed always 
just about to seize him; and a rumour came after him like the shadow-sound 
of many feet. He stumbled on until he was crawling like a beast on the 
ground and felt that he could endure no more: he must either find an ending 
and escape or run back in madness to meet the following fear. 

Suddenly he heard the tinkle of water, a sound hard and clear as a 
stone falling into a dream of dark shadow. Light grew, and lo! the company 
passed through another gateway, high-arched and broad, and a rill ran out 
beside them; and beyond, going steeply down, was a road between sheer 
cliffs, knife-edged against the sky far above. So deep and narrow was that 
chasm that the sky was dark, and in it small stars glinted. Yet as Gimli 
after learned it was still two hours ere sunset of the day on which they had 
set out from Dunharrow; though for all that he could then tell it might have 
been twilight in some later year, or in some other world. 

The Company now mounted again, and Gimli returned to Legolas. They 
rode 

in file, and evening came on and a deep blue dusk; and still fear pursued 
them. Legolas turning to speak to Gimli looked back and the Dwarf saw before 
his face the glitter in the Elf s bright eyes. Behind them rode Elladan, 
last of the Company, but not the last of those that took the downward road. 

The Dead are following,' said Legolas. 'I see shapes of Men and of 
horses, and pale banners like shreds of cloud, and spears like 
winter-thickets on a misty night. The Dead are following.' 

'Yes, the Dead ride behind. They have been summoned,' said Elladan. 

The Company came at last out of the ravine, as suddenly as it they had 
issued from a crack in a wall; and there lay the uplands of a great vale 
before them, and the stream beside them went down with a cold voice over 
many falls. 

'Where in Middle-earth are we?' said Gimli; and Elladan answered: 'We 




have descended from the uprising of the Morthond, the long chill river that 
flows at last to the sea that washes the walls of Dol Amroth. You will not 
need to ask hereafter how comes its name: Blackroot men call it.' 

The Morthond Vale made a great bay that beat up against the sheer 
southern faces of the mountains. Its steep slopes were grass-grown; but all 
was grey in that hour, for the sun had gone, and far below lights twinkled 
in the homes of Men. The vale was rich and many folk dwelt there. 

Then without turning Aragorn cried aloud so that all could hear: 
’Friends, forget your weariness! Ride now, ride! We must come to the Stone 
of Erech ere this day passes, and long still is the way.' So without looking 
back they rode the mountain-fields, until they came to a bridge over the 
growing torrent and found a road that went down into the land. 

Lights went out in house and hamlet as they came, and doors were shut, 
and folk that were afield cried in terror and ran wild like hunted deer. 

Ever there rose the same cry in the gathering night: 'The King of the Dead! 
The King of the Dead is come upon us!' 

Bells were ringing far below, and all men fled before the face of 
Aragorn; but the Grey Company in their haste rode like hunters, until their 
horses were stumbling with weariness. And thus, just ere midnight, and in a 
darkness as black as the caverns in the mountains, they came at last to the 
Hill of Erech. 

Long had the terror of the Dead lain upon that hill and upon the empty 
fields about it. For upon the top stood a black stone, round as a great 
globe, the height of a man, though its half was buried in the ground. 
Unearthly it looked, as though it had fallen from the sky, as some believed; 
but those who remembered still the lore of Westernesse told that it had been 
brought out of the ruin of N®menor and there set by Isildur at his landing. 
None of the people of the valley dared to approach it, nor would they dwell 
near; for they said that it was a try sting -place of the Shadow-men, and 
there they would gather in times of fear, thronging round the Stone and 
whispering. 

To that Stone the Company came and halted in the dead of night. Then 
Elrohir gave to Aragorn a silver horn, and he blew upon it and it seemed to 
those that stood near that they heard a sound of answering horns, as if it 
was an echo in deep caves far away. No other sound they heard, and yet they 
were aware of a great host gathered all about the hill on which they stood; 
and a chill wind like the breath of ghosts came down from the mountains. But 




Aragorn dismounted, and standing by the Stone he cried in a great voice: 

'Oathbreakers, why have ye come?' 

And a voice was heard out of the night that answered him, as if from 
far away: 

’To fulfil our oath and have peace.' 

Then Aragorn said: ’The hour is come at last. Now I go to Pelargir upon 
Anduin, and ye shall come after me. And when all this land is clean of the 
servants of Sauron, I will hold the oath fulfilled, and ye shall have peace 
and depart for ever. For I am Elessar, Isildur's heir of Gondor.’ 

And with that he bade Halbarad unfurl the great standard which he had 
brought; and behold! it was black, and if there was any device upon it, it 
was hidden in the darkness. Then there was silence, and not a whisper nor a 
sigh was heard again all the long night. The Company camped beside the 
Stone, but they slept little, because of the dread of the Shadows that 
hedged them round. 

But when the dawn came, cold and pale, Aragorn rose at once, and he led 
the Company forth upon the journey of greatest haste and weariness that any 
among them had known, save he alone, and only his will held them to go on. 
No other mortal Men could have endured it, none but the D®nedain of the 
North, and with them Gimli the Dwarf and Legolas of the Elves. 

They passed Tarlang’s Neck and came into Lamedon; and the Shadow 
Host 

pressed behind and fear went on before them, until they came to Calembel 
upon Ciril, and the sun went down like blood behind Pinnath Gelin away in 
the West behind them. The township and the fords of Ciril they found 
deserted, for many men had gone away to war, and all that were left fled to 
the hills at the rumour of the coming of the King of the Dead. But the next 
day there came no dawn, and the Grey Company passed on into the darkness 
of 

the Storm of Mordor and were lost to mortal sight; but the Dead followed 
them.